EXCELSIOR . " Goblin , lead them up and down ." The ruddy glow of sunset was already fading into the sombre shadows of night , when two travellers might have been observed swiftly -- at a pace of six miles in the hour -- descending the rugged side of a mountain ; the younger bounding from crag to crag with the agility of a fawn , while his companion , whose aged limbs seemed ill at ease in the heavy chain armour habitually worn by tourists in that district , toiled on painfully at his side . As is always the case under such circumstances , the younger knight was the first to break the silence . " A goodly pace , I trow !" he exclaimed . " We sped not thus in the ascent !" " Goodly , indeed !" the other echoed with a groan . " We clomb it but at three miles in the hour ." " And on the dead level our pace is ----?" the younger suggested ; for he was weak in statistics , and left all such details to his aged companion . " Four miles in the hour ," the other wearily replied . " Not an ounce more ," he added , with that love of metaphor so common in old age , " and not a farthing less !" "' Twas three hours past high noon when we left our hostelry ," the young man said , musingly . " We shall scarce be back by supper - time . Perchance mine host will roundly deny us all food !" " He will chide our tardy return ," was the grave reply , " and such a rebuke will be meet ." " A brave conceit !" cried the other , with a merry laugh . " And should we bid him bring us yet another course , I trow his answer will be tart !" " We shall but get our deserts ," sighed the elder knight , who had never seen a joke in his life , and was somewhat displeased at his companion ' s untimely levity . "' Twill be nine of the clock ," he added in an undertone , " by the time we regain our hostelry . Full many a mile shall we have plodded this day !" " How many ? How many ?" cried the eager youth , ever athirst for knowledge . The old man was silent . " Tell me ," he answered , after a moment ' s thought , " what time it was when we stood together on yonder peak . Not exact to the minute !" he added hastily , reading a protest in the young man ' s face . " An ' thy guess be within one poor half - hour of the mark , ' tis all I ask of thy mother ' s son ! Then will I tell thee , true to the last inch , how far we shall have trudged betwixt three and nine of the clock ." A groan was the young man ' s only reply ; while his convulsed features and the deep wrinkles that chased each other across his manly brow , revealed the abyss of arithmetical agony into which one chance question had plunged him . 