_Problem . _ -- To mark pictures , giving 3 x ' s to 2 or 3 , 2 to 4 or 5 , and 1 to 9 or 10 ; also giving 3 o ' s to 1 or 2 , 2 to 3 or 4 and 1 to 8 or 9 ; so as to mark the smallest possible number of pictures , and to give them the largest possible number of marks . _Answer . _ -- 10 pictures ; 29 marks ; arranged thus :-- x x x x x x x x x o x x x x x o o o o x x o o o o o o o o _Solution . _ -- By giving all the x ' s possible , putting into brackets the optional ones , we get 10 pictures marked thus :-- x x x x x x x x x ( x ) x x x x ( x ) x x ( x ) By then assigning o ' s in the same way , beginning at the other end , we get 9 pictures marked thus :-- ( o ) o ( o ) o o o ( o ) o o o o o o o o All we have now to do is to run these two wedges as close together as they will go , so as to get the minimum number of pictures ---- erasing optional marks where by so doing we can run them closer , but otherwise letting them stand . There are 10 necessary marks in the 1st row , and in the 3rd ; but only 7 in the 2nd . Hence we erase all optional marks in the 1st and 3rd rows , but let them stand in the 2nd . * * * * * Twenty - two answers have been received . Of these 11 give no working ; so , in accordance with what I announced in my last review of answers , I leave them unnamed , merely mentioning that 5 are right and 6 wrong . Of the eleven answers with which some working is supplied , 3 are wrong . C . H . begins with the rash assertion that under the given conditions " the sum is impossible . For ," he or she adds ( these initialed correspondents are dismally vague beings to deal with : perhaps " it " would be a better pronoun ), " 10 is the least possible number of pictures " ( granted ): " therefore we must either give 2 x ' s to 6 , or 2 o ' s to 5 ." Why " must ," oh alphabetical phantom ? It is nowhere ordained that every picture " must " have 3 marks ! FIFEE sends a folio page of solution , which deserved a better fate : she offers 3 answers , in each of which 10 pictures are marked , with 30 marks ; in one she gives 2 x ' s to 6 pictures ; in another to 7 ; in the 3rd she gives 2 o ' s to 5 ; thus in every case ignoring the conditions . ( I pause to remark that the condition " 2 x ' s to 4 or 5 pictures " can only mean " _either_ to 4 _or else_ to 5 ": if , as one competitor holds , it might mean _any_ number not less than 4 , the words " _or_ 5 " would be superfluous .) I . E . A . ( I am happy to say that none of these bloodless phantoms appear this time in the class - list . Is it IDEA with the " D " left out ?) gives 2 x ' s to 6 pictures . She then takes me to task for using the word " ought " instead of " nought ." No doubt , to one who thus rebels against the rules laid down for her guidance , the word must be distasteful . But does not I . E . A . remember the parallel case of " adder "? That creature was originally " a nadder ": then the two words took to bandying the poor " n " backwards and forwards like a shuttlecock , the final state of the game being " an adder ." May not " a nought " have similarly become " an ought "? Anyhow , " oughts and crosses " is a very old game . I don ' t think I ever heard it called " noughts and crosses ." In the following Class - list , I hope the solitary occupant of III . will sheathe her claws when she hears how narrow an escape she has had of not being named at all . Her account of the process by which she got the answer is so meagre that , like the nursery tale of " Jack - a - Minory " ( I trust I . E . A . will be merciful to the spelling ), it is scarcely to be distinguished from " zero ." CLASS LIST . I . GUY . OLD CAT . SEA - BREEZE . II . AYR . BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE . F . LEE . H . VERNON . III . CAT . 