CHELSEA BUNS . " Yea , buns , and buns , and buns !" OLD SONG . " How very , very sad !" exclaimed Clara ; and the eyes of the gentle girl filled with tears as she spoke . " Sad -- but very curious when you come to look at it arithmetically ," was her aunt ' s less romantic reply . " Some of them have lost an arm in their country ' s service , some a leg , some an ear , some an eye ----" " And some , perhaps , _all_ !" Clara murmured dreamily , as they passed the long rows of weather - beaten heroes basking in the sun . " Did you notice that very old one , with a red face , who was drawing a map in the dust with his wooden leg , and all the others watching ? I _think_ it was a plan of a battle ----" " The battle of Trafalgar , no doubt ," her aunt interrupted , briskly . " Hardly that , I think ," Clara ventured to say . " You see , in that case , he couldn ' t well be alive ----" " Couldn ' t well be alive !" the old lady contemptuously repeated . " He ' s as lively as you and me put together ! Why , if drawing a map in the dust -- with one ' s wooden leg -- doesn ' t prove one to be alive , perhaps you ' ll kindly mention what _does_ prove it !" Clara did not see her way out of it . Logic had never been her _forte_ . " To return to the arithmetic ," Mad Mathesis resumed -- the eccentric old lady never let slip an opportunity of driving her niece into a calculation --" what percentage do you suppose must have lost all four -- a leg , an arm , an eye , and an ear ?" " How _can_ I tell ?" gasped the terrified girl . She knew well what was coming . " You can ' t , of course , without _data_ ," her aunt replied : " but I ' m just going to give you ----" " Give her a Chelsea bun , Miss ! That ' s what most young ladies likes best !" The voice was rich and musical , and the speaker dexterously whipped back the snowy cloth that covered his basket , and disclosed a tempting array of the familiar square buns , joined together in rows , richly egged and browned , and glistening in the sun . " No , sir ! I shall give her nothing so indigestible ! Be off !" The old lady waved her parasol threateningly : but nothing seemed to disturb the good - humour of the jolly old man , who marched on , chanting his melodious refrain :-- [ Music : Chel - sea buns ! Chel - sea buns hot ! Chel - sea buns ! Pi - ping hot ! Chel - sea buns hot ! Chel - sea buns !] " Far too indigestible , my love !" said the old lady . " Percentages will agree with you ever so much better !" Clara sighed , and there was a hungry look in her eyes as she watched the basket lessening in the distance : but she meekly listened to the relentless old lady , who at once proceeded to count off the _data_ on her fingers . " Say that 70 per cent . have lost an eye -- 75 per cent . an ear -- 80 per cent . an arm -- 85 per cent . a leg -- that ' ll do it beautifully . Now , my dear , what percentage , _at least_ , must have lost all four ?" No more conversation occurred -- unless a smothered exclamation of " Piping hot !" which escaped from Clara ' s lips as the basket vanished round a corner could be counted as such -- until they reached the old Chelsea mansion , where Clara ' s father was then staying , with his three sons and their old tutor . Balbus , Lambert , and Hugh had entered the house only a few minutes before them . They had been out walking , and Hugh had been propounding a difficulty which had reduced Lambert to the depths of gloom , and had even puzzled Balbus . " It changes from Wednesday to Thursday at midnight , doesn ' t it ?" Hugh had begun . " Sometimes ," said Balbus , cautiously . " Always ," said Lambert , decisively . " _Sometimes_ ," Balbus gently insisted . " Six midnights out of seven , it changes to some other name ." " I meant , of course ," Hugh corrected himself , " when it _does_ change from Wednesday to Thursday , it does it at midnight -- and _only_ at midnight ." " Surely ," said Balbus . Lambert was silent . " Well , now , suppose it ' s midnight here in Chelsea . Then it ' s Wednesday _west_ of Chelsea ( say in Ireland or America ) where midnight hasn ' t arrived yet : and it ' s Thursday _east_ of Chelsea ( say in Germany or Russia ) where midnight has just passed by ?" " Surely ," Balbus said again . Even Lambert nodded this time . " But it isn ' t midnight , anywhere else ; so it can ' t be changing from one day to another anywhere else . And yet , if Ireland and America and so on call it Wednesday , and Germany and Russia and so on call it Thursday , there _must_ be some place -- not Chelsea -- that has different days on the two sides of it . And the worst of it is , the people _there_ get their days in the wrong order : they ' ve got Wednesday _east_ of them , and Thursday _west_ -- just as if their day had changed from Thursday to Wednesday !" " I ' ve heard that puzzle before !" cried Lambert . " And I ' ll tell you the explanation . When a ship goes round the world from east to west , we know that it loses a day in its reckoning : so that when it gets home , and calls its day Wednesday , it finds people here calling it Thursday , because we ' ve had one more midnight than the ship has had . And when you go the other way round you gain a day ." " I know all that ," said Hugh , in reply to this not very lucid explanation : " but it doesn ' t help me , because the ship hasn ' t proper days . One way round , you get more than twenty - four hours to the day , and the other way you get less : so of course the names get wrong : but people that live on in one place always get twenty - four hours to the day ." " I suppose there _is_ such a place ," Balbus said , meditatively , " though I never heard of it . And the people must find it very queer , as Hugh says , to have the old day _east_ of them , and the new one _west_ : because , when midnight comes round to them , with the new day in front of it and the old one behind it , one doesn ' t see exactly what happens . I must think it over ." So they had entered the house in the state I have described -- Balbus puzzled , and Lambert buried in gloomy thought . " Yes , m ' m , Master _is_ at home , m ' m ," said the stately old butler . ( N . B .-- It is only a butler of experience who can manage a series of three M ' s together , without any interjacent vowels .) " And the _ole_ party is a - waiting for you in the libery ." " I don ' t like his calling your father an _old_ party ," Mad Mathesis whispered to her niece , as they crossed the hall . And Clara had only just time to whisper in reply " he meant the _whole_ party ," before they were ushered into the library , and the sight of the five solemn faces there assembled chilled her into silence . Her father sat at the head of the table , and mutely signed to the ladies to take the two vacant chairs , one on each side of him . His three sons and Balbus completed the party . Writing materials had been arranged round the table , after the fashion of a ghostly banquet : the butler had evidently bestowed much thought on the grim device . Sheets of quarto paper , each flanked by a pen on one side and a pencil on the other , represented the plates -- penwipers did duty for rolls of bread -- while ink - bottles stood in the places usually occupied by wine - glasses . The _pièce de resistance_ was a large green baize bag , which gave forth , as the old man restlessly lifted it from side to side , a charming jingle , as of innumerable golden guineas . " Sister , daughter , sons -- and Balbus --," the old man began , so nervously , that Balbus put in a gentle " Hear , hear !" while Hugh drummed on the table with his fists . This disconcerted the unpractised orator . " Sister --" he began again , then paused a moment , moved the bag to the other side , and went on with a rush , " I mean -- this being -- a critical occasion -- more or less -- being the year when one of my sons comes of age --" he paused again in some confusion , having evidently got into the middle of his speech sooner than he intended : but it was too late to go back . " Hear , hear !" cried Balbus . " Quite so ," said the old gentleman , recovering his self - possession a little : " when first I began this annual custom -- my friend Balbus will correct me if I am wrong --" ( Hugh whispered " with a strap !" but nobody heard him except Lambert , who only frowned and shook his head at him ) "-- this annual custom of giving each of my sons as many guineas as would represent his age -- it was a critical time -- so Balbus informed me -- as the ages of two of you were together equal to that of the third -- so on that occasion I made a speech ----" He paused so long that Balbus thought it well to come to the rescue with the words " It was a most ----" but the old man checked him with a warning look : " yes , made a speech ," he repeated . " A few years after that , Balbus pointed out -- I say pointed out --" (" Hear , hear "! cried Balbus . " Quite so ," said the grateful old man .) "-- that it was _another_ critical occasion . The ages of two of you were together _double_ that of the third . So I made another speech -- another speech . And now again it ' s a critical occasion -- so Balbus says -- and I am making ----" ( Here Mad Mathesis pointedly referred to her watch ) " all the haste I can !" the old man cried , with wonderful presence of mind . " Indeed , sister , I ' m coming to the point now ! The number of years that have passed since that first occasion is just two - thirds of the number of guineas I then gave you . Now , my boys , calculate your ages from the _data_ , and you shall have the money !" " But we _know_ our ages !" cried Hugh . " Silence , sir !" thundered the old man , rising to his full height ( he was exactly five - foot five ) in his indignation . " I say you must use the _data_ only ! You mustn ' t even assume _which_ it is that comes of age !" He clutched the bag as he spoke , and with tottering steps ( it was about as much as he could do to carry it ) he left the room . " And _you_ shall have a similar _cadeau_ ," the old lady whispered to her niece , " when you ' ve calculated that percentage !" And she followed her brother . Nothing could exceed the solemnity with which the old couple had risen from the table , and yet was it -- was it a _grin_ with which the father turned away from his unhappy sons ? Could it be -- could it be a _wink_ with which the aunt abandoned her despairing niece ? And were those -- were those sounds of suppressed _chuckling_ which floated into the room , just before Balbus ( who had followed them out ) closed the door ? Surely not : and yet the butler told the cook -- but no , that was merely idle gossip , and I will not repeat it . The shades of evening granted their unuttered petition , and " closed not o ' er " them ( for the butler brought in the lamp ): the same obliging shades left them a " lonely bark " ( the wail of a dog , in the back - yard , baying the moon ) for " awhile ": but neither " morn , alas ," ( nor any other epoch ) seemed likely to " restore " them -- to that peace of mind which had once been theirs ere ever these problems had swooped upon them , and crushed them with a load of unfathomable mystery ! " It ' s hardly fair ," muttered Hugh , " to give us such a jumble as this to work out !" " Fair ?" Clara echoed , bitterly . " Well !" And to all my readers I can but repeat the last words of gentle Clara -- FARE - WELL ! APPENDIX . " A knot !" said Alice . " Oh , do let me help to undo it !" 