LOOKING EASTWARD . “ It ' s just a week ,” I said , three days later , to Arthur , “ since we heard of Lady Muriel ' s engagement . I think I ought to call , at any rate , and offer my congratulations . Won ' t you come with me ?” A pained expression passed over his face . “ When must you leave us ?” he asked . “ By the first train on Monday .” “ Well -- yes , I will come with you . It would seem strange and unfriendly if I didn ' t . But this is only Friday . Give me till Sunday afternoon . I shall be stronger then .” Shading his eyes with one hand , as if half - ashamed of the tears that were coursing down his cheeks , he held the other out to me . It trembled as I clasped it . I tried to frame some words of sympathy ; but they seemed poor and cold , and I left them unspoken . “ Good night !” was all I said . “ Good night , dear friend !” he replied . There was a manly vigour in his tone that convinced me he was wrestling with , and triumphing over , the great sorrow that had so nearly wrecked his life -- and that , on the stepping - stone of his dead self , he would surely rise to higher things ! There was no chance , I was glad to think , as we set out on Sunday afternoon , of meeting Eric at the Hall , as he had returned to town the day after his engagement was announced . His presence might have disturbed the calm -- the almost unnatural calm -- with which Arthur met the woman who had won his heart , and murmured the few graceful words of sympathy that the occasion demanded . Lady Muriel was perfectly radiant with happiness : sadness could not live in the light of such a smile : and even Arthur brightened under it , and , when she remarked “ You see I ' m watering my flowers , though it is the Sabbath - Day ,” his voice had almost its old ring of cheerfulness as he replied “ Even on the Sabbath - Day works of mercy are allowed . But this isn ' t the Sabbath - Day . The Sabbath - day has ceased to exist .” “ I know it ' s not Saturday ,” Lady Muriel replied ; “ but isn ' t Sunday often called ' the Christian Sabbath '?” “ It is so called , I think , in recognition of the spirit of the Jewish institution , that one day in seven should be a day of rest . But I hold that Christians are freed from the literal observance of the Fourth Commandment .” “ Then where is our authority for Sunday observance ?” “ We have , first , the fact that the seventh day was ' sanctified ', when God rested from the work of Creation . That is binding on us as Theists . Secondly , we have the fact that ' the Lord ' s Day ' is a Christian institution . That is binding on us as Christians .” “ And your practical rules would be --?” “ First , as Theists , to keep it holy in some special way , and to make it , so far as is reasonably possible , a day of rest . Secondly , as Christians , to attend public worship .” “ And what of amusements ?” “ I would say of them , as of all kinds of work , whatever is innocent on a week - day , is innocent on Sunday , provided it does not interfere with the duties of the day .” “ Then you would allow children to play on Sunday ?” “ Certainly I should . Why make the day irksome to their restless natures ?” “ I have a letter somewhere ,” said Lady Muriel , “ from an old friend , describing the way in which Sunday was kept in her younger days . I will fetch it for you .” “ I had a similar description , viva voce , years ago ,” Arthur said when she had left us , “ from a little girl . It was really touching to hear the melancholy tone in which she said ' On Sunday I mustn ' t play with my doll ! On Sunday I mustn ' t run on the sands ! On Sunday I mustn ' t dig in the garden !' Poor child ! She had indeed abundant cause for hating Sunday !” “ Here is the letter ,” said Lady Muriel , returning . “ Let me read you a piece of it .” “ When , as a child , I first opened my eyes on a Sunday - morning , a feeling of dismal anticipation , which began at least on the Friday , culminated . I knew what was before me , and my wish , if not my word , was ' Would God it were evening !' It was no day of rest , but a day of texts , of catechisms ( Watts '), of tracts about converted swearers , godly charwomen , and edifying deaths of sinners saved . “ Up with the lark , hymns and portions of Scripture had to be learned by heart till 8 o ' clock , when there were family - prayers , then breakfast , which I was never able to enjoy , partly from the fast already undergone , and partly from the outlook I dreaded . “ At 9 came Sunday - School ; and it made me indignant to be put into the class with the village - children , as well as alarmed lest , by some mistake of mine , I should be put below them . “ The Church - Service was a veritable Wilderness of Zin . I wandered in it , pitching the tabernacle of my thoughts on the lining of the square family - pew , the fidgets of my small brothers , and the horror of knowing that , on the Monday , I should have to write out , from memory , jottings of the rambling disconnected extempore sermon , which might have had any text but its own , and to stand or fall by the result . “ This was followed by a cold dinner at 1 ( servants to have no work ), Sunday - School again from 2 to 4 , and Evening - Service at 6 . The intervals were perhaps the greatest trial of all , from the efforts I had to make , to be less than usually sinful , by reading books and sermons as barren as the Dead Sea . There was but one rosy spot , in the distance , all that day : and that was ' bed - time ,' which never could come too early !” “ Such teaching was well meant , no doubt ,” said Arthur ; “ but it must have driven many of its victims into deserting the Church - Services altogether .” “ I ' m afraid I was a deserter this morning ,” she gravely said . “ I had to write to Eric . Would you -- would you mind my telling you something he said about prayer ? It had never struck me in that light before .” “ In what light ?” said Arthur . “ Why , that all Nature goes by fixed , regular laws -- Science has proved that . So that asking God to do anything ( except of course praying for spiritual blessings ) is to expect a miracle : and we ' ve no right to do that . I ' ve not put it as well as he did : but that was the outcome of it , and it has confused me . Please tell me what you can say in answer to it .” “ I don ' t propose to discuss Captain Lindon ' s difficulties ,” Arthur gravely replied ; “ specially as he is not present . But , if it is your difficulty ,” ( his voice unconsciously took a tenderer tone ) “ then I will speak .” “ It is my difficulty ,” she said anxiously . “ Then I will begin by asking ' Why did you except spiritual blessings ?' Is not your mind a part of Nature ?” “ Yes , but Free - Will comes in there -- I can choose this or that ; and God can influence my choice .” “ Then you are not a Fatalist ?” “ Oh , no !” she earnestly exclaimed . “ Thank God !” Arthur said to himself , but in so low a whisper that only I heard it . “ You grant then that I can , by an act of free choice , move this cup ,” suiting the action to the word , “ this way or that way ?” “ Yes , I grant it .” “ Well , let us see how far the result is produced by fixed laws . The cup moves because certain mechanical forces are impressed on it by my hand . My hand moves because certain forces -- electric , magnetic , or whatever ' nerve - force ' may prove to be -- are impressed on it by my brain . This nerve - force , stored in the brain , would probably be traceable , if Science were complete , to chemical forces supplied to the brain by the blood , and ultimately derived from the food I eat and the air I breathe .” “ But would not that be Fatalism ? Where would Free - Will come in ?” “ In choice of nerves ,” replied Arthur . “ The nerve - force in the brain may flow just as naturally down one nerve as down another . We need something more than a fixed Law of Nature to settle which nerve shall carry it . That ' something ' is Free - Will .” Her eyes sparkled . “ I see what you mean !” she exclaimed . “ Human Free - Will is an exception to the system of fixed Law . Eric said something like that . And then I think he pointed out that God can only influence Nature by influencing Human Wills . So that we might reasonably pray ' give us this day our daily bread ,' because many of the causes that produce bread are under Man ' s control . But to pray for rain , or fine weather , would be as unreasonable as --” she checked herself , as if fearful of saying something irreverent . In a hushed , low tone , that trembled with emotion , and with the solemnity of one in the presence of death , Arthur slowly replied “ Shalt he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him ? Shall we ' the swarm that in the noontide beam were born ,' feeling in ourselves the power to direct , this way or that , the forces of Nature -- of Nature , of which we form so trivial a part -- shall we , in our boundless arrogance , in our pitiful conceit , deny that power to the Ancient of Days ? Saying , to our Creator , ' Thus far and no further . Thou madest , but thou canst not rule ! '?” Lady Muriel had covered her face in her hands , and did not look up . She only murmured “ Thanks , thanks !” again and again . We rose to go . Arthur said , with evident effort , “ One word more . If you would know the power of Prayer -- in anything and everything that Man can need try it . Ask , and it shall be given you . I -- have tried it . I know that God answers prayer !” Our walk home was a silent one , till we had nearly reached the lodgings : then Arthur murmured -- and it was almost an echo of my own thoughts --“ What knowest thou , O wife , whether thou shalt save thy husband ?” The subject was not touched on again . We sat on , talking , while hour after hour , of this our last night together , glided away unnoticed . He had much to tell me about India , and the new life he was going to , and the work he hoped to do . And his great generous soul seemed so filled with noble ambition as to have no space left for any vain regret or selfish repining . “ Come , it is nearly morning ! Arthur said at last , rising and leading the way upstairs . “ The sun will be rising in a few minutes : and , though I have basely defrauded you of your last chance of a night ' s rest here , I ' m sure you ' ll forgive me : for I really couldn ' t bring myself to say ' Good night ' sooner . And God knows whether you ' ll ever see me again , or hear of me !” “ Hear of you I am certain I shall !” I warmly responded , and quoted the concluding lines of that strange poem ' Waring ':-- “ Oh , never star Was lost here , but it rose afar Look East , where whole new thousands are ! In Vishnu - land what Avatar ?” “ Aye , look Eastward !” Arthur eagerly replied , pausing at the stair - case window , which commanded a fine view of the sea and the eastward horizon . “ The West is the fitting tomb for all the sorrow and the sighing , all the errors and the follies of the Past : for all its withered Hopes and all its buried Loves ! From the East comes new strength , new ambition , new Hope , new Life , new Love ! Look Eastward ! Aye , look Eastward !” His last words were still ringing in my ears as I entered my room , and undrew the window - curtains , just in time to see the sun burst in glory from his ocean - prison , and clothe the world in the light of a new day . “ So may it be for him , and me , and all of us !” I mused . “ All that is evil , and dead , and hopeless , fading with the Night that is past ! All that is good , and living , and hopeful , rising with the dawn of Day ! “ Fading , with the Night , the chilly mists , and the noxious vapours , and the heavy shadows , and the wailing gusts , and the owl ' s melancholy hootings : rising , with the Day , the darting shafts of light , and the wholesome morning breeze , and the warmth of a dawning life , and the mad music of the lark ! Look Eastward ! “ Fading , with the Night , the clouds of ignorance , and the deadly blight of sin , and the silent tears of sorrow : and ever rising , higher , higher , with the Day , the radiant dawn of knowledge , and the sweet breath of purity , and the throb of a world ' s ecstasy ! Look Eastward ! { Image ...' Look eastward !'} “ Fading , with the Night , the memory of a dead love , and the withered leaves of a blighted hope , and the sickly repinings and moody regrets that numb the best energies of the soul : and rising , broadening , rolling upward like a living flood , the manly resolve , and the dauntless will , and the heavenward gaze of faith -- the substance of things hoped for , the evidence of things not seen ! “ Look Eastward ! Aye , look Eastward !” PREFACE . One little picture in this book , the Magic Locket , at p . 77 , was drawn by ' Miss Alice Havers .' I did not state this on the title - page , since it seemed only due , to the artist of all these ( to my mind ) wonderful pictures , that his name should stand there alone . The descriptions , at pp . 386 , 387 , of Sunday as spent by children of the last generation , are quoted verbatim from a speech made to me by a child - friend and a letter written to me by a lady - friend . The Chapters , headed ' Fairy Sylvie ' and ' Bruno ' s Revenge ,' are a reprint , with a few alterations , of a little fairy - tale which I wrote in the year 1867 , at the request of the late Mrs . Gatty , for ' Aunt Judy ' s Magazine ,' which she was then editing . It was in 1874 , I believe , that the idea first occurred to me of making it the nucleus of a longer story . As the years went on , I jotted down , at odd moments , all sorts of odd ideas , and fragments of dialogue , that occurred to me -- who knows how ?-- with a transitory suddenness that left me no choice but either to record them then and there , or to abandon them to oblivion . Sometimes one could trace to their source these random flashes of thought -- as being suggested by the book one was reading , or struck out from the ' flint ' of one ' s own mind by the ' steel ' of a friend ' s chance remark but they had also a way of their own , of occurring , a propos of nothing -- specimens of that hopelessly illogical phenomenon , ' an effect without a cause .' Such , for example , was the last line of ' The Hunting of the Snark ,' which came into my head ( as I have already related in ' The Theatre ' for April , 1887 ) quite suddenly , during a solitary walk : and such , again , have been passages which occurred in dreams , and which I cannot trace to any antecedent cause whatever . There are at least two instances of such dream - suggestions in this book -- one , my Lady ' s remark , ' it often runs in families , just as a love for pastry does ', at p . 88 ; the other , Eric Lindon ' s badinage about having been in domestic service , at p . 332 . And thus it came to pass that I found myself at last in possession of a huge unwieldy mass of litterature -- if the reader will kindly excuse the spelling -- which only needed stringing together , upon the thread of a consecutive story , to constitute the book I hoped to write . Only ! The task , at first , seemed absolutely hopeless , and gave me a far clearer idea , than I ever had before , of the meaning of the word ' chaos ': and I think it must have been ten years , or more , before I had succeeded in classifying these odds - and - ends sufficiently to see what sort of a story they indicated : for the story had to grow out of the incidents , not the incidents out of the story I am telling all this , in no spirit of egoism , but because I really believe that some of my readers will be interested in these details of the ' genesis ' of a book , which looks so simple and straight - forward a matter , when completed , that they might suppose it to have been written straight off , page by page , as one would write a letter , beginning at the beginning ; and ending at the end . It is , no doubt , possible to write a story in that way : and , if it be not vanity to say so , I believe that I could , myself ,-- if I were in the unfortunate position ( for I do hold it to be a real misfortune ) of being obliged to produce a given amount of fiction in a given time ,-- that I could ' fulfil my task ,' and produce my ' tale of bricks ,' as other slaves have done . One thing , at any rate , I could guarantee as to the story so produced -- that it should be utterly commonplace , should contain no new ideas whatever , and should be very very weary reading ! This species of literature has received the very appropriate name of ' padding ' which might fitly be defined as ' that which all can write and none can read .' That the present volume contains no such writing I dare not avow : sometimes , in order to bring a picture into its proper place , it has been necessary to eke out a page with two or three extra lines : but I can honestly say I have put in no more than I was absolutely compelled to do . My readers may perhaps like to amuse themselves by trying to detect , in a given passage , the one piece of ' padding ' it contains . While arranging the ' slips ' into pages , I found that the passage , whichnow extends from the top of p . 35 to the middle of p . 38 , was 3 lines too short . I supplied the deficiency , not by interpolating a word here and a word there , but by writing in 3 consecutive lines . Now can my readers guess which they are ? A harder puzzle if a harder be desired would be to determine , as to the Gardener ' s Song , in which cases ( if any ) the stanza was adapted to the surrounding text , and in which ( if any ) the text was adapted to the stanza . Perhaps the hardest thing in all literature -- at least I have found it so : by no voluntary effort can I accomplish it : I have to take it as it come ' s is to write anything original . And perhaps the easiest is , when once an original line has been struck out , to follow it up , and to write any amount more to the same tune . I do not know if ' Alice in Wonderland ' was an original story -- I was , at least , no conscious imitator in writing it -- but I do know that , since it came out , something like a dozen story - books have appeared , on identically the same pattern . The path I timidly explored believing myself to be ' the first that ever burst into that silent sea '-- is now a beaten high - road : all the way - side flowers have long ago been trampled into the dust : and it would be courting disaster for me to attempt that style again . Hence it is that , in ' Sylvie and Bruno ,' I have striven with I know not what success to strike out yet another new path : be it bad or good , it is the best I can do . It is written , not for money , and not for fame , but in the hope of supplying , for the children whom I love , some thoughts that may suit those hours of innocent merriment which are the very life of Childhood ; and also in the hope of suggesting , to them and to others , some thoughts that may prove , I would fain hope , not wholly out of harmony with the graver cadences of Life . If I have not already exhausted the patience of my readers , I would like to seize this opportunity perhaps the last I shall have of addressing so many friends at once of putting on record some ideas that have occurred to me , as to books desirable to be written -- which I should much like to attempt , but may not ever have the time or power to carry through -- in the hope that , if I should fail ( and the years are gliding away very fast ) to finish the task I have set myself , other hands may take it up . First , a Child ' s Bible . The only real essentials of this would be , carefully selected passages , suitable for a child ' s reading and pictures . One principle of selection , which I would adopt , would be that Religion should be put before a child as a revelation of love no need to pain and puzzle the young mind with the history of crime and punishment . ( On such a principle I should , for example , omit the history of the Flood .) The supplying of the pictures would involve no great difficulty : no new ones would be needed : hundreds of excellent pictures already exist , the copyright of which has long ago expired , and which simply need photo - zincography , or some similar process , for their successful reproduction . The book should be handy in size with a pretty attractive looking cover -- in a clear legible type -- and , above all , with abundance of pictures , pictures , pictures ! Secondly , a book of pieces selected from the Bible -- not single texts , but passages of from 10 to 20 verses each -- to be committed to memory . Such passages would be found useful , to repeat to one ' s self and to ponder over , on many occasions when reading is difficult , if not impossible : for instance , when lying awake at night -- on a railway - journey -- when taking a solitary walk - in old age , when eye - sight is failing of wholly lost -- and , best of all , when illness , while incapacitating us for reading or any other occupation , condemns us to lie awake through many weary silent hours : at such a time how keenly one may realise the truth of David ' s rapturous cry ' O how sweet are thy words unto my throat : yea , sweeter than honey unto my mouth !' I have said ' passages ,' rather than single texts , because we have no means of recalling single texts : memory needs links , and here are none : one may have a hundred texts stored in the memory , and not be able to recall , at will , more than half - a - dozen -- and those by mere chance : whereas , once get hold of any portion of a chapter that has been committed to memory , and the whole can be recovered : all hangs together . Thirdly , a collection of passages , both prose and verse , from books other than the Bible . There is not perhaps much , in what is called ' un - inspired ' literature ( a misnomer , I hold : if Shakespeare was not inspired , one may well doubt if any man ever was ), that will bear the process of being pondered over , a hundred times : still there are such passages -- enough , I think , to make a goodly store for the memory . These two books of sacred , and secular , passages for memory -- will serve other good purposes besides merely occupying vacant hours : they will help to keep at bay many anxious thoughts , worrying thoughts , uncharitable thoughts , unholy thoughts . Let me say this , in better words than my own , by copying a passage from that most interesting book , Robertson ' s Lectures on the Epistles to the Corinthians , Lecture XLIX . “ If a man finds himself haunted by evil desires and unholy images , which will generally be at periodical hours , let him commit to memory passages of Scripture , or passages from the best writers in verse or prose . Let him store his mind with these , as safeguards to repeat when he lies awake in some restless night , or when despairing imaginations , or gloomy , suicidal thoughts , beset him . Let these be to him the sword , turning everywhere to keep the way of the Garden of Life from the intrusion of profaner footsteps .” Fourthly , a “ Shakespeare ” for girls : that is , an edition in which everything , not suitable for the perusal of girls of ( say ) from 10 to 17 , should be omitted . Few children under 10 would be likely to understand or enjoy the greatest of poets : and those , who have passed out of girlhood , may safely be left to read Shakespeare , in any edition , ' expurgated ' or not , that they may prefer : but it seems a pity that so many children , in the intermediate stage , should be debarred from a great pleasure for want of an edition suitable to them . Neither Bowdler ' s , Chambers ' s , Brandram ' s , nor Cundell ' s ' Boudoir ' Shakespeare , seems to me to meet the want : they are not sufficiently ' expurgated .' Bowdler ' s is the most extraordinary of all : looking through it , I am filled with a deep sense of wonder , considering what he has left in , that he should have cut anything out ! Besides relentlessly erasing all that is unsuitable on the score of reverence or decency , I should be inclined to omit also all that seems too difficult , or not likely to interest young readers . The resulting book might be slightly fragmentary : but it would be a real treasure to all British maidens who have any taste for poetry . If it be needful to apologize to any one for the new departure I have taken in this story -- by introducing , along with what will , I hope , prove to be acceptable nonsense for children , some of the graver thoughts of human life -- it must be to one who has learned the Art of keeping such thoughts wholly at a distance in hours of mirth and careless ease . To him such a mixture will seem , no doubt , ill - judged and repulsive . And that such an Art exists I do not dispute : with youth , good health , and sufficient money , it seems quite possible to lead , for years together , a life of unmixed gaiety -- with the exception of one solemn fact , with which we are liable to be confronted at any moment , even in the midst of the most brilliant company or the most sparkling entertainment . A man may fix his own times for admitting serious thought , for attending public worship , for prayer , for reading the Bible : all such matters he can defer to that ' convenient season ', which is so apt never to occur at all : but he cannot defer , for one single moment , the necessity of attending to a message , which may come before he has finished reading this page ,' this night shalt thy soul be required of thee .' The ever - present sense of this grim possibility has been , in all ages ,* Note ... At the moment , when I had written these words , there was a knock at the door , and a telegram was brought me , announcing the sudden death of a dear friend . an incubus that men have striven to shake off . Few more interesting subjects of enquiry could be found , by a student of history , than the various weapons that have been used against this shadowy foe . Saddest of all must have been the thoughts of those who saw indeed an existence beyond the grave , but an existence far more terrible than annihilation -- an existence as filmy , impalpable , all but invisible spectres , drifting about , through endless ages , in a world of shadows , with nothing to do , nothing to hope for , nothing to love ! In the midst of the gay verses of that genial ' bon vivant ' Horace , there stands one dreary word whose utter sadness goes to one ' s heart . It is the word ' exilium ' in the well - known passage Omnes eodem cogimur , omnium Versatur urna serius ocius Sors exitura et nos in aeternum Exilium impositura cymbae . Yes , to him this present life -- spite of all its weariness and all its sorrow -- was the only life worth having : all else was ' exile '! Does it not seem almost incredible that one , holding such a creed , should ever have smiled ? And many in this day , I fear , even though believing in an existence beyond the grave far more real than Horace ever dreamed of , yet regard it as a sort of ' exile ' from all the joys of life , and so adopt Horace ' s theory , and say ' let us eat and drink , for to - morrow we die .' We go to entertainments , such as the theatre -- I say ' we ', for I also go to the play , whenever I get a chance of seeing a really good one and keep at arm ' s length , if possible , the thought that we may not return alive . Yet how do you know -- dear friend , whose patience has carried you through this garrulous preface that it may not be your lot , when mirth is fastest and most furious , to feel the sharp pang , or the deadly faintness , which heralds the final crisis -- to see , with vague wonder , anxious friends bending over you to hear their troubled whispers perhaps yourself to shape the question , with trembling lips , “ Is it serious ?”, and to be told “ Yes : the end is near ” ( and oh , how different all Life will look when those words are said !) -- how do you know , I say , that all this may not happen to you , this night ? And dare you , knowing this , say to yourself “ Well , perhaps it is an immoral play : perhaps the situations are a little too ' risky ', the dialogue a little too strong , the ' business ' a little too suggestive . I don ' t say that conscience is quite easy : but the piece is so clever , I must see it this once ! I ' ll begin a stricter life to - morrow .” To - morrow , and to - morrow , and tomorrow ! “ Who sins in hope , who , sinning , says , ' Sorrow for sin God ' s judgement stays !' Against God ' s Spirit he lies ; quite stops Mercy with insult ; dares , and drops , Like a scorch ' d fly , that spins in vain Upon the axis of its pain , Then takes its doom , to limp and crawl , Blind and forgot , from fall to fall .” Let me pause for a moment to say that I believe this thought , of the possibility of death -- if calmly realised , and steadily faced would be one of the best possible tests as to our going to any scene of amusement being right or wrong . If the thought of sudden death acquires , for you , a special horror when imagined as happening in a theatre , then be very sure the theatre is harmful for you , however harmless it may be for others ; and that you are incurring a deadly peril in going . Be sure the safest rule is that we should not dare to live in any scene in which we dare not die . But , once realise what the true object is in life -- that it is not pleasure , not knowledge , not even fame itself , ' that last infirmity of noble minds '-- but that it is the development of character , the rising to a higher , nobler , purer standard , the building - up of the perfect Man -- and then , so long as we feel that this is going on , and will ( we trust ) go on for evermore , death has for us no terror ; it is not a shadow , but a light ; not an end , but a beginning ! One other matter may perhaps seem to call for apology -- that I should have treated with such entire want of sympathy the British passion for ' Sport ', which no doubt has been in by - gone days , and is still , in some forms of it , an excellent school for hardihood and for coolness in moments of danger . But I am not entirely without sympathy for genuine ' Sport ': I can heartily admire the courage of the man who , with severe bodily toil , and at the risk of his life , hunts down some ' man - eating ' tiger : and I can heartily sympathize with him when he exults in the glorious excitement of the chase and the hand - to - hand struggle with the monster brought to bay . But I can but look with deep wonder and sorrow on the hunter who , at his ease and in safety , can find pleasure in what involves , for some defenceless creature , wild terror and a death of agony : deeper , if the hunter be one who has pledged himself to preach to men the Religion of universal Love : deepest of all , if it be one of those ' tender and delicate ' beings , whose very name serves as a symbol of Love --' thy love to me was wonderful , passing the love of women '-- whose mission here is surely to help and comfort all that are in pain or sorrow ! ' Farewell , farewell ! but this I tell To thee , thou Wedding - Guest ! He prayeth well , who loveth well Both man and bird and beast . He prayeth best , who loveth best All things both great and small ; For the dear God who loveth us , He made and loveth all .' 