OUR DESTINATION CHANGED IT was not long after the death of the two men , that Captain Guy was reported as fast declining , and in a day or two more , as dying . The doctor , who previously had refused to enter the cabin upon any consideration , now relented , and paid his old enemy a professional visit . He prescribed a warm bath , which was thus prepared . The skylight being removed , a cask was lowered down into the cabin , and then filled with buckets of water from the ship ' s coppers . The cries of the patient , when dipped into his rude bath , were most painful to hear . They at last laid him on the transom , more dead than alive . That evening , the mate was perfectly sober , and coming forward to the windlass , where we were lounging , summoned aft the doctor , myself , and two or three others of his favourites ; when , in the presence of Bembo the Mowree , he spoke to us thus : " I have something to say to ye , men . There ' s none but Bembo here as belongs aft , so I ' ve picked ye out as the best men for ' ard to take counsel with , d ' ye see , consarning the ship . The captain ' s anchor is pretty nigh atrip ; I shouldn ' t wonder if he croaked afore morning . So what ' s to be done ? If we have to sew him up , some of those pirates there for ' ard may take it into their heads to run off with the ship , because there ' s no one at the tiller . Now , I ' ve detarmined what ' s best to be done ; but I don ' t want to do it unless I ' ve good men to back me , and make things all fair and square if ever we get home again ." We all asked what his plan was . " I ' ll tell ye what it is , men . If the skipper dies , all agree to obey my orders , and in less than three weeks I ' ll engage to have five hundred barrels of sperm oil under hatches : enough to give every mother ' s son of ye a handful of dollars when we get to Sydney . If ye don ' t agree to this , ye won ' t have a farthing coming to ye ." Doctor Long Ghost at once broke in . He said that such a thing was not to be dreamt of ; that if the captain died , the mate was in duty bound to navigate the ship to the nearest civilized port , and deliver her up into an English consul ' s hands ; when , in all probability , after a run ashore , the crew would be sent home . Everything forbade the mate ' s plan . " Still ," said he , assuming an air of indifference , " if the men say stick it out , stick it out say I ; but in that case , the sooner we get to those islands of yours the better ." Something more he went on to say ; and from the manner in which the rest regarded him , it was plain that our fate was in his hands . It was finally resolved upon , that if Captain Guy was no better in twenty - four hours , the ship ' s head should be pointed for the island of Tahiti . This announcement produced a strong sensation -- the sick rallied -- and the rest speculated as to what was next to befall us ; while the doctor , without alluding to Guy , congratulated me upon the prospect of soon beholding a place so famous as the island in question . The night after the holding of the council , I happened to go on deck in the middle watch , and found the yards braced sharp up on the larboard tack , with the South East Trades strong on our bow . The captain was no better ; and we were off for Tahiti . 