OUTBREAK OF THE CREW THE purpose of Bembo had been made known to the men generally by the watch ; and now that our salvation was certain , by an instinctive impulse they raised a cry , and rushed toward him . Just before liberated by Dunk and the steward , he was standing doggedly by the mizzen - mast ; and , as the infuriated sailors came on , his bloodshot eye rolled , and his sheath - knife glittered over his head . " Down with him !" " Strike him down !" " Hang him at the main - yard !" such were the shouts now raised . But he stood unmoved , and , for a single instant , they absolutely faltered . " Cowards !" cried Salem , and he flung himself upon him . The steel descended like a ray of light ; but did no harm ; for the sailor ' s heart was beating against the Mowree ' s before he was aware . They both fell to the deck , when the knife was instantly seized , and Bembo secured . " For ' ard ! for ' ard with him !" was again the cry ; " give him a sea - toss !" " Overboard with him !" and he was dragged along the deck , struggling and fighting with tooth and nail . All this uproar immediately over the mate ' s head at last roused him from his drunken nap , and he came staggering on deck . " What ' s this ?" he shouted , running right in among them . " It ' s the Mowree , zur ; they are going to murder him , zur ," here sobbed poor Rope Yarn , crawling close up to him . " Avast ! avast !" roared Jermin , making a spring toward Bembo , and dashing two or three of the sailors aside . At this moment the wretch was partly flung over the bulwarks , which shook with his frantic struggles . In vain the doctor and others tried to save him : the men listened to nothing . " Murder and mutiny , by the salt sea !" shouted the mate ; and dashing his arms right and left , he planted his iron hand upon the Mowree ' s shoulder . " There are two of us now ; and as you serve him , you serve me ," he cried , turning fiercely round . " Over with them together , then ," exclaimed the carpenter , springing forward ; but the rest fell back before the courageous front of Jermin , and , with the speed of thought , Bembo , unharmed , stood upon deck . " Aft with ye !" cried his deliverer ; and he pushed him right among the men , taking care to follow him up close . Giving the sailors no time to recover , he pushed the Mowree before him , till they came to the cabin scuttle , when he drew the slide over him , and stood still . Throughout , Bembo never spoke one word . " Now for ' ard where ye belong !" cried the mate , addressing the seamen , who by this time , rallying again , had no idea of losing their victim . " The Mowree ! the Mowree !" they shouted . Here the doctor , in answer to the mate ' s repeated questions , stepped forward , and related what Bembo had been doing ; a matter which the mate but dimly understood from the violent threatenings he had been hearing . For a moment he seemed to waver ; but at last , turning the key of the padlock of the slide , he breathed through his set teeth --" Ye can ' t have him ; I ' ll hand him over to the consul ; so for ' ard with ye , I say : when there ' s any drowning to be done , I ' ll pass the word ; so away with ye , ye blood - thirsty pirates ." It was to no purpose that they begged or threatened : Jermin , although by no means sober , stood his ground manfully , and before long they dispersed , soon to forget everything that had happened . Though we had no opportunity to hear him confess it , Bembo ' s intention to destroy us was beyond all question . His only motive could have been a desire to revenge the contumely heaped upon him the night previous , operating upon a heart irreclaimably savage , and at no time fraternally disposed toward the crew . During the whole of this scene the doctor did his best to save him . But well knowing that all I could do would have been equally useless , I maintained my place at the wheel . Indeed , no one but Jermin could have prevented this murder . 